docs: release notes for 1.11.0 (#875)
canonical/rockcraft: docs/release-notes/rockcraft-1-11.rst

.. _release-1.11:

Rockcraft 1.11 release notes
============================

2 May 2025

Learn about the new features, changes, and fixes introduced in Rockcraft 1.11.
For information about the Rockcraft release cycle, see the
:ref:`release_policy_and_schedule`.

.. craft-application 4.10.0 -> 5.2.0
   craft-parts 2.7.0 -> 2.9.0
   Testing command/init

>    plugins: cargo-use, gradle, maven wrapper

Reviewer: Is this a TODO?

Author: yes, to myself while I was drafting this. Thanks for pointing it out, removed!

Author: yes, to myself while I was drafting this. Thanks for pointing it out, removed!

Requirements and compatibility
------------------------------

To run Rockcraft, a system requires the following minimum hardware and
installed software. These requirements apply to local hosts as well as VMs and
container hosts.

Minimum hardware requirements
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

- AMD64, ARM64, ARMv7-M, RISC-V 64-bit, PowerPC 64-bit little-endian, or S390x
  processor
- 2GB RAM
- 10GB available storage space
- Internet access for remote software sources and the Snap Store

Platform requirements
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

.. list-table::
  :header-rows: 1
  :widths: 1 3 3

  * - Platform
    - Version
    - Software requirements
  * - GNU/Linux
    - Popular distributions that ship with systemd and are `compatible with
      snapd <https://snapcraft.io/docs/installing-snapd>`_
    - systemd

What's new
----------

Rockcraft 1.11 brings the following features, integrations, and improvements.

> Test command
> ~~~~~~~~~~~~
> 
> The new ``test`` command, and accompanying ``init`` profile, enable testing of
> generated rocks.  These tests leverage `Spread`_ to run in an isolated local `LXD`_ VM
> and in CI systems.
> 
> This new command is experimental and subject to change. To get started with testing an
> existing Rockcraft project file, run ``rockcraft init --profile=test``. For a
> description of the command and its options, run ``rockcraft test --help``.

Reviewer: I don't think the LXD part is necessary, do you?

```suggestion
Test command
~~~~~~~~~~~~

A new command called ``test``, and its accompanying ``init`` profile, are available for
testing rocks. They leverage `Spread`_ to run identically on local and remote systems.

The command is experimental and subject to change. To try it on an existing rock
project, run ``rockcraft init --profile=test`` at the root of your project directory.
For a description of the command and its options, run ``rockcraft test --help``.
```

Cargo-use plugin
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

We added a plugin that sets up a local `cargo registry`_ for `Rust`_ crates. These
crates can then be used by the existing :ref:`Rust plugin <craft_parts_rust_plugin>`.
See the :ref:`craft_parts_cargo_use_plugin` reference for details.

Gradle plugin
~~~~~~~~~~~~~

We added a plugin to build sources using the `Gradle`_ build tool. See the
:ref:`craft_parts_gradle_plugin` reference for details.

Minor features
--------------

Rockcraft 1.11 brings the following minor changes.

> Support for maven wrappers
> ~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~
> 
> The ``maven`` plugin now supports the ``maven-use-wrapper`` key to indicate that the
> build should use the wrapper provided by the source code. See the
> :ref:`craft_parts_maven_plugin` reference for details.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Support for Maven wrappers
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

The Maven plugin now supports the ``maven-use-wrapper`` key to indicate that the build
should use the wrapper provided by the source code. See the
:ref:`craft_parts_maven_plugin` reference for details.
```
